---
title: "Research"
layout: archive
permalink: /research/
---

My research aims to improve maternal and child health and development through the design and evaluation of effective, sustainable, and scalable interventions that center on building local capacity. In my current and previous work I have focused on the three areas outlined below:

### Scalable caregiving interventions for early child development
I have contributed to the design and evaluation of three group-based early-child development interventions designed to answer questions about the integration of components for multiple risk factors beyond stimulation in the home (<a href="https://gh.bmj.com/content/6/3/e004307.abstract" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">Pitchik et al, 2021</a>), the effectiveness of group-based intervention delivery (<a href="https://www.thelancet.com/journals/langlo/article/PIIS2214-109X(20)30469-1/fulltext" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">Luoto et al, 2021</a>), and the feasibility and effectiveness of integration with the government health system (Pitchik et al., Paper in progress). Together, this work aims to answer questions about the optimal content and delivery of interventions to improve early child development in LMIC settings.

<!-- before comma used to be this  ([Pitchik et al, 2021](https://gh.bmj.com/content/6/3/e004307.abstract)) -->

### Maternal mental health
I have focused on maternal mental health within my work on early child development, both in the development and evaluation of the interventions implemented in Bangladesh, and in work that synthesizes the current evidence on the effects of early child development interventions on caregivers (<a href="https://publications.aap.org/pediatrics/article/141/4/e20173510/37794/Stimulation-Interventions-and-Parenting-in-Low-and?autologincheck=redirected?nfToken=00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">Jeong, Pitchik, Yousafzai, 2018</a>). As part of my dissertation, I examined the effect of the COVID-19 related shut-downs on maternal mental health and parenting behaviors in rural Bangladesh (<a href="https://srcd.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/cdev.13651" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer">Pitchik et al, 2021</a>). I found that caregivers who experienced more food insecurity and financial loss during COVID-19 related shut-downs reported larger increases in depressive symptoms. I am currently leading a project to distinguish between pre-pregnancy depressive symptoms and perinatal depressive symptom changes in a longitudinal cohort of adolescent girls and young women in rural South Africa. In this area of work, I aim to inform intergenerational interventions to improve both the mental health of mothers and the development of their young children.

### Structural interventions to improve maternal and child health
Interventions that implement infrastructure changes (e.g. building toilets, constructing homestead chicken coops) to reduce environmental exposure to pathogens have the potential to improve child health and development. I am currently working on two projects to understand how structural sanitation interventions (alone, or in combination with other interventions) affect child development outcomes. I am currently leading the analysis of a middle-childhood development follow-up of a water, sanitation, hygiene, and nutrition intervention in rural Bangladesh. I am also working on quantitative and qualitative research projects to understand the ways in which community sanitation facilities have the potential to reduce both environmental exposure to pathogens for young children, and the anxiety and fear that comes with inconsistent access to safe and convenient places to relieve oneself, especially for women.
